riverbank publication no. 22, written in 1920 when friedman was28, must be regarded as the most important single publication incryptology. it took the science into a new world. entitled the index ofcoincidence and its applications in cryptography, it described thesolution of two complicated cipher systems. friedman, however, was lessinterested in proving their vulnerability than he was in using them as avehicle for new methods of cryptanalysis.in it, friedman devised two new techniques. one was brilliant. itpermitted him to reconstruct a primary cipher alphabet without havingto guess at a single plaintext letter. but the other was profound. for thefirst time in cryptology, friedman treated a frequency distribution as anentity, as a curve whose several points were causally related, not as justa collection of individual letters that happen to stand in a certain orderfor noncausal (historical) reasons, and to this curve he applied statisticalconcepts. the results can only be described as promethean, forfriedman's stroke of genius inspired the numerous, varied, and vitalstatistical tools that are indispensable to the cryptology of today.before friedman, cryptology eked out an existence as a study untoitself, as an isolated phenomenon, neither borrowing from norcontributing to other bodies of knowledge. frequency counts, linguisticcharacteristics, kasiski examinationsÂ€”all were peculiar and particular tocryptology. it dwelt a recluse in the world of science. friedman ledcryptology out of this lonely wilderness and into the broad rich domain ofstatistics. he connected cryptology to mathematics. the sense ofexpanding horizons must have resembled that felt by chemists whenfriedrich wohler synthesized urea, demonstrating that life processesoperate under well-known chemical laws and are therefore subject toexperimentation and control, and leading to today's vast strides inbiochemistry. when friedman subsumed cryptanalysis under statistics, he likewise flung wide the door to anarmamentarium to which cryptology had never before had access. itsweaponsÂ€”measures of central tendency and dispersion, of fit andskewness, of probability and sampling and significanceÂ€”were ideallyfashioned to deal with the statistical behavior of letters and words.cryptanalysts, seizing them with alacrity, have wielded them withnotable success ever since.this is why friedman has said, in looking back over his career, thatthe index of coincidence was his greatest single creation. it alone wouldhave won him his reputation. but in fact it was only the beginning. he and mrs. friedman quit riverbank near the end of 1920. thesituation had become intolerable. fabyan had lured him back after thewar with raises and promises of absolute freedom to prove or disprovethe existence of ciphers in shakespeare. but he had squelched everyattempt to do so and had embarrassed friedman into apparentlyacquiescent silence at lantern-slide lectures on the subject. on january1, 1921, friedman began a six-month contract with the signal corps todevise cryptosystems. when it expired, he was taken on the civil-servicepayroll of the war department at $4,500 a year.one of his first assignments was to teach a course in military codesand ciphers at the signal school, then at camp alfred vail, new jersey.for this he wrote a textbook that, for the first time, imposed order uponthe chaos of cipher systems and their terminology. these had sproutedin a bewildering variety, and writers treated each as individual andspecial cases. friedman sorted them out on the basis of structureinstead of aspect, and so logical and useful was this classification that ithas become standard. he modeled his nomenclature on his categories, sothat the names he minted have the great merit of making the relationsbetween the various genera of ciphers evident on sight. an example is thecomplementary pair "mono-alphabet" and "polyalphabet"; the frenchwere still calling
polyalphabetic systems by the almost obfuscatory"double substitution," which tells absolutely nothing at all about thesystem. friedman's most important coinage was the word"cryptanalysis," which he devised in 1920 to clear up a chronic source ofconfusion in cryptologyÂ€”the ambiguity of the verb "decipher," then usedto mean both authorized and unauthorized reductions of a cryptogram to plaintext.he titled his book elements of cryptanalysis, and the term has soprospered that today it circulates in general conversation and print.